The fourth and final challenge with talent
analytics that I wanna emphasize today is
reverse causality.
And this is the tendency,
when we see two correlated factors,
to believe that one causes the other.
Especially if there's an intuitive
direction, we look for
this kind of casuality as natural for
us to seek it.
But the trouble is, often the casuality,
there may be no casuality at all but
worse, the casuality might actually
go in the other direction.
So for example,
are charismatic leaders more successful?
This is a widely held opinion and
it makes a lot of sense.
One can make the argument that well
there's all these benefits to being
charismatic.
It's naturally associated
with successful leaders.
And so sure.
Let's just go with that.
Charismatic leaders are more successful.
Fortunately for us,
a few people have studied this.
Agle et al a few years ago published
a paper in the Academy of Management where
they looked at charisma and
success among 128 CEOs of major US firms.
They used a longitudinal design so
they could look at the perceptions at
one time and the outcomes at another.
So, what they found was that
charismatic CEOs did not actually have
more organizational success down the road.
But interestingly, successful CEOs
were perceived as more charismatic.
So it is not the case that charisma
leads leaders to be more successful, but
rather just the opposite.
That the success itself breathes in us
the perception that they're charismatic.
We find similar dynamics around power and
the warning
is that we have to be very careful about
what causal stories we tell ourselves.
So we're driven to make
sense of the world.
We're driven to make sense
of the world we live in,
to build causal stories
from what we observe.
The trouble is that leads us to
see things that don't exist.
It leads us to give people credit and
people blame,
in situations they may not deserve it.
An interesting study that showed
this in kind of profound ways was
an early study,1977 study by Jim March,
the very famous organizational scholar
Jim March, and his son, also James March.
They looked at the careers of
school's superintendent in Wisconsin.
So they got this great data set,
they could look over a long
stretch of time, 32 years.
Everybody who had been
a superintendent in the state, and
the trajectory of their career.
So you can imagine,
how do you think this goes?
What would you expect to be the story?
You would expect that there's this great
range in abilities among superintendents.
And there are a range of
differences in the jobs.
You might want the jobs in the bigger
cities and not be as interested,
or maybe a few people want them,
in the you can call it small towns.
But you'd expect great variation in both
places, and there's probably this formal
evaluation system that makes sure that the
best people get placed in the best jobs.
This is what we'd expect, this is kinda
what the system is designed to do.
What they found, however,
is that when you look at what happens,
it is very difficult to distinguish
the observed career paths from what you'd
expect from a completely random process.
That even though we might look and say,
well this superintendent achieved this
success, or this superintendent achieved
this failure, or this guy's in this place,
this woman is in that place,
for certain stories.
We can tell the stories.
It turns out there's
very little difference.
It's hard to find any difference
from what we observe in the data and
what we would've expected if it was
just completely randomly distributed.
Matching people to jobs by chance.
So, these guys conclude their study
with a profound statement that's a good
warning to all of us
about reverse causality.
The normative lesson is, the stories
we tell each other about success and
failure in top management,
like the stories we tell about success and
failure in gambling, are in large part
fictions intended to reassure us about
justice and encourage the young.
So a little bit of a cynical note
from Jim March, his son there.
But it's well intended.
It's well intended because he wants to
urge us, don't draw these inferences.
Be careful about causal reasoning.
Be aware that often the causality
runs the other way.
And you've gotta run the data, basically.
The principle means by which you do this
with talent analytics is make sure you
have some causal structure in your data,
that you're using longitudinal panels,
that you're very careful about the
inferences you have to draw when you're
stuck with just correlational data.